---
day: 11
title: Day 11
main_img:
  name: Incorrect Password
  link: /assets/images/incorrect-password.jpg
tags: 
  - name: Regular Expressions (Regex)
    link: /python/regex
  - name: Recursion
    link: /python/recursion
  - name: ord()
    link: https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/methods/built-in/ord
  - name: chr()
    link: https://www.programiz.com/python-programming/methods/built-in/chr
  - name: Exceptions
    link: /python/exceptions
---

## Problem Intro

We need to devise a system that automatically generates a password based on the previous password.  We need to generate new passwords by _incrementing_ password characters from the rightmost character, in the same way that we would increment a number. Each new password must be exactly 8 lowercase characters.  In addition, we're giving a set of rules to match.

The input is simply the initial password we need to increment from.  E.g.

```text
cqjxjnds
```

This is fairly simple. We can do all the necessary string rule matching using [regex](/python/regex). The slightly tricker bit is how we increment the string. I've elected to do this with some [recursion](/python/recursion).

## Part 1

We're provided with a set of rules:

- Must have one _straight_ of at least three characters.  E.g. `cde`.
- Must not contain the letters `i`, `o`, `l`.
- Must contain at least two different, non-overlapping pairs, e.g. `aa` and `zz`.

**Given Santa's current password (the puzzle input), what should his next password be?**

First, I define the rules we need to match against, using regular expressions:

```python
# validate straight
STRAIGHT_MATCH = re.compile(r"abc|bcd|cde|def|efg|fgh|ghi|hij|ijk|jkl|klm|lmn|mno|nop|opq|pqr|qrs|rst|stu|tuv|uvw|vwx|wxy|xyz")
# Two non-overlapping pairs of any character
PAIRS_CHARS_MATCH = re.compile(r"(.)\1.*(.)\2")
# match any of i, o, u
BAD_CHARS_MATCH = re.compile(r"[iol]")
```

Rules explained:

- The first one is obvious.  It's just a bunch of _straights_ and we need to match against any one of them.
- The second is a bit more tricky.  
  - We use `"(.)\1"` to mean: _match any character, and then any subsequent character that is the same._ So this would match `aa`, `bb`, etc.
  - Then we use `".*"` to match 0 or more intervening characters.
  - Then we use `"(.)\2"` to mean: _match any character, and then any subsequent character that is the same._ It's the same as the first rule, but uses `"\2"`, since we're now matching against second group, rather than the first group.
  - Note that as it stands, the `PAIRS_CHARS_MATCH` will match any string that contains two non-overlapping pairs, but it doesn't check if the pairs are different.  So, `aaghiaa` would match okay. But we need this to _not_ be okay. We'll deal with that later, in the code.

Now I create a function that checks our rules:

```python
def check_rules(a_password):
    """ Match the supplied password against our set of validation rules """
    if not STRAIGHT_MATCH.search(a_password):
        return False

    if BAD_CHARS_MATCH.search(a_password):
        return False
        
    two_pairs_match = PAIRS_CHARS_MATCH.search(a_password)
    if not two_pairs_match:
        return False
    else:
        pair_one, pair_two = two_pairs_match.groups()
        if pair_one == pair_two:
            # the two pairs must be different, e.g. aa and bb, but not aa and aa
            return False

    return True
```

This function passes in the password we want to check, and then checks it against our three regular expressions.  If any of these expressions doesn't much, then the function returns `False`.  The only point worth mentioning is that when we're applying the `PAIRS_CHARS_MATCH` rule, we check the two groups returned by any match, to determine if they are _different_.  For example, if we applied this rule against `aaefgaa`, the regex would return two groups: `aa` and `aa`. If the two pairs are the same, then our rule has failed, and we return `False`.

Finally, if we've satisfied all the rules, we return `True`.

Next, I create a function that increments the password.

```python
def increment_pwd(pwd):
    """ Recursive function that increments password supplied pwd by 1. 
    E.g. aaa -> aab; aay -> aaz; aaz -> aba
    
    Throws an IndexError if we try to increment a zero-length password
    """

    last_col = len(pwd) - 1
    char = pwd[last_col]
    left_chars = pwd[:last_col]
    new_char = next_char(char)

    if (new_char) == 'a':
        # We've rolled over from z to a, so we need to increment one column left
        # So pass in all pwd chars on the left, exluding rightmost column, and call this method recursively
        left_chars = increment_pwd(left_chars)
    
    new_pwd = left_chars + new_char
    return new_pwd
```

This function is [recursive](/python/recursion). This is how it works:

- We get the rightmost character and increment it. (We'll define the function that does that next.)
- We add the incremented character to all the preceeding characters, to create the new password.
- The _interesting_ bit is where we check if the incremented character is an `a`.  
  If it is, then it means we've _wrapped around from `z`_.  And in that case, we now need to increment the column on the left. To do this, we recursively call the _same_ function, passing in all the password characters except the one we just incremented.

Note: there is a scenario where this function can throw an **IndexError**, as explained in the function comments. Imagine if our password is all `z` characters.  In this scenario, each character will wrap around to a.  Eventually, the recursive call to `increment_pwd(left_chars)` with an empty input string.  In this situation, the call to `len(pwd)` will return 0, the `last_col` will be set to `-1`, and the attempt to index this string will fail with an IndexError. We'll handle that later.

Once we've returned from this function, we test our newly constructed password, using the function we've already described.

Now let's have a look at the `next_char()` function.  This function has the job of incrementing the supplied character.  E.g.

`a -> b -> c... -> y -> z -> a`

```python
def next_char(a_char: str):
    if (a_char != 'z'):
        # get ascii code, add 1, then convert back to a char
        return chr(ord(a_char)+1)
    else:
        # if we're incrementing 'z', then we need to wrap around to 'a'
        return 'a'
```

This function is simple enough.  We use `ord()` to change the current character to its unicode integer value.  E.g.

|Character|Unicode Value|
|---------|-------------|
|a|97|
|b|98|
|c|99|
|y|121|
|z|122|

We then increment that value, and then we use `chr()` to convert back again.  E.g. `ord('a')` gives us `97`.  We add `1` to get `98`.  And then `chr(98)` gives us `b`.

The exception is if our input character is `z`.  In this case, we know we want to wrap around and return an `a`.  Simple!

Now let's put it all together:

```python
def main():
    old_pwd = 'cqjxjnds'
    new_pwd = find_next_password(old_pwd)
    print(new_pwd)

def find_next_password(new_pwd: str):
    new_pwd_valid = False
    while not new_pwd_valid:
        try:
            new_pwd = increment_pwd(new_pwd)
            new_pwd_valid = check_rules(new_pwd)
        except IndexError:
            # thrown if we reach all z
            print("Max value reached")
            break
    return new_pwd
```

We start with our `old_pwd`, which is our input data. Then we pass this into the `find_next_password()` function.  This function:

- Increments the current password by 1.
- Tests whether the incremented password is valid.
- Repeats the above for as long as long as the incremented password isn't valid.
- Catches the `IndexError` if we've reached the _maximum_ value for the password, i.e. all `z`. Now would be a good time to check out my page on [exception handling](/python/exceptions) works in Python. We only use exceptions to handle conditions that we believe to be abnormal.

## Part 2

We're told Santa's password has expired again.  **What is the next valid password?**

Erm, okay.  So, all I need to do is call my function again. Wow, easiest Part 2... ever!!

```python
def main():
    old_pwd = 'cqjxjnds'

    # Part 1
    new_pwd = find_next_password(old_pwd)
    print(new_pwd)

    # Part 2 - just do it again!!
    new_pwd = find_next_password(new_pwd)
    print(new_pwd)
```

Here's the output:

```text
cqjxxyzz
cqkaabcc
Execution time: 1.4652 seconds
```

Fast enough.

On to the next challenge!