---
day: 7
title: Day 7
main_img:
  name: Wires and Gates
  link: /assets/images/wires_and_gates.jpg
tags: 
  - name: Parsimonious (PEG)
    link: https://pypi.org/project/parsimonious/
  - name: reduce
    link: /python/lambda-map-filter-reduce#reduce
  - name: lambda
    link: /python/lambda-map-filter-reduce#lambda
---
## Problem Intro

We're told that we have wires - identified by lowercase letters - which carry 16 bit signals. A signal is provided to each wire by a gate, another wire, or a specific value. Wires can only take a single input signal, but can provide a signal to multiple destinations. The gates are:

|Gate|Meaning|
|----|-------|
|`x AND y`|Bitwise AND of x and wy|
|`x OR y` |Bitwise OR of x and y|
|`x LSHIFT y`|Left-shift x by y positions|
|`x RSHIFT y`|Right-shift x by y positions|
|`NOT x`|Bitwise complement of x|

Gates will only provide an ouput signal when all of its inputs have a signal.

Instructions look like this:

```text
123 -> x
x AND y -> d
x OR y -> e
456 -> y
x LSHIFT 2 -> f
y RSHIFT 2 -> g
NOT x -> h
NOT y -> i
```

## Part 1

**What signal is ultimately provided to wire a?**

What we need to do is process each instruction in the input.

The challenge is that some instructions can be processed straight away, but some cannot.  Specifically: if an instruction refers to any wires that do not yet have a value, then that instruction can not be processed yet.  To explain this further, look at the example instructions above.  We can process this instruction straight away:

```text
123 -> x
```

But we can't yet process these instruction, because we don't yet have a value for `y`:

```text
x AND y -> d
x OR y -> e
```

But the next instruction sets our value for `y`:

```text
456 -> y
```

So if we process the instructions for a second time, we will be able to process those two instructions that were previously blocked.

Thus, **my strategy is**:

1. Process the instructions from top to bottom. For each instruction:
  - If we are able to process the instruction (because all required inputs have values), then process the instruction, and then _pop it_ (remove it) from the instruction list. This instruction is done.
  - If we are unable to process the instruction (because we don't have all required input values), then we don't pop it yet.
1. For as long as we have instructions left, go back to 1.

## Solution Code

```python

```



