---
day: 1
title: Day 1
main_img:
  name: "Counting Calories"
  link: /assets/images/counting-calories.jpg
tags: 
  - name: Reading Files
    link: /python/reading_files
  - name: My AoC Template
    link: /python/my-aoc-template
  - name: Map
    link: /python/map-filter-reduce
---

## Page Navigation

- [Problem Intro](#problem-intro)
- [Part 1](#part-1)
- [Part 2](#part-2)
- [Results](#results)

## Problem Intro

As usual AoC starts with an easy challenge.  This one took me about a minute to write.  But if you're new to AoC, or to Python, don't sweat it!  My first ever Day 1 - when I was learning Python - took me about 30 minutes!

Check out my [Python Journey](/python/) pages to read more about the concepts and modules I use in these solutions.

For this challenge, we're told that the elves are on an expedition. Each elf is carrying a number of meals, and each meal contains a specific number of calories. This is our input data.  Specifically:

- Our input data contains lines of numbers, with occasional empty lines.
- Each line is a number, representing the calories for an elf meal.
- Each contiguous block of lines represents the meals for a given elf.
- The empty lines separate one elf from the next.

So the input data looks something like this:

```text
1000
2000
3000

4000

5000
6000

7000
8000
9000

10000
```

## Part 1

**Find the Elf carrying the most Calories. How many total Calories is that Elf carrying?**

Okay, so what we need to do is find the block of numbers that adds up to the largest value.

Here's how I did it:

- Read the data, and split by empty lines, to return a `list`.
- Each element in the list is a single `str`, containing all the meal calorie values for that elf. Each calorie value is separated by a single newline character. (Because all the calorie values were on separate lines.)
- Split this `str` into its constituent numbers, by using `splitlines()`. Each calorie value is returned as a `str`.
- Convert every number `str` to an `int`. The Pythonic way to do this is using the [`map()` function](/python/map-filter-reduce).
- Sum these numbers.  This gives us the total calorie count for each elf. Add this count to a `list`.
- Finally, use `max()` to return the biggest number in our list.

Here is the code:

```python
from pathlib import Path
import time

SCRIPT_DIR = Path(__file__).parent
# INPUT_FILE = Path(SCRIPT_DIR, "input/sample_input.txt")
INPUT_FILE = Path(SCRIPT_DIR, "input/input.txt")

def main():
    with open(INPUT_FILE, mode="rt") as f:
        elf_meals = f.read().split("\n\n") # split on empty lines
    
    elf_calories = [] # store total calories for each elf
    for elf in elf_meals:
        calories = sum(map(int, elf.splitlines()))
        elf_calories.append(calories)
        
    print(f"Part 1: {max(elf_calories)}")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    t1 = time.perf_counter()
    main()
    t2 = time.perf_counter()
    print(f"Execution time: {t2 - t1:0.4f} seconds")
```

## Part 2

**Find the top three Elves carrying the most Calories. How many Calories are those Elves carrying in total?**

This is easy to do.  My solution:

- Take the list of calories that we obtained before, and sort it in ascending numerical order.
- Then use a slice to return the last three values.  Here our slice is `[-3:]`. That means, get all the elements starting with the third from the end (because `-1` is the last, `-2` is adjacent to the last, and so on), all the way to the last element (inclusive).
- Then `sum` the slice.

So, we just need to add this to our `main()` method:

```python
    elf_calories = sorted(elf_calories)
    print(f"Part 2: {sum(elf_calories[-3:])}")
```

## Results

The output looks like this:

```text
Part 1: 67016
Part 2: 200116
Execution time: 0.0007 seconds
```